thank you very much I would like to
begin by announcing some important
developments in our war against the
Chinese virus we'll be invoking the
defense production act just in case we
need it in other words I think you all
know what it is and it can do a lot of
good things if we need it and we will we
will have it completed signing it in
just a little while right after I'm
finished with this conference I'll be
signing it it's prepared to go so we
will be invoking the defense production
Act last week I signed an emergency
declaration under the Stafford Act which
as you know we invoked previously and
which activated FEMA's National Response
Coordination Center FEMA now is fully
engaged at the highest levels today FEMA
is activated in every region we are at
level one level one being the highest
level which we will work with and we've
been working with FEMA I've done a lot
of work with FEMA they're incredible
it's always been on hurricanes or
tornados they're right now in Tennessee
large group working in Tennessee have
have been incredible that was tragic
event Alabama last year also a tornado
and then obviously the numerous
hurricanes and different locations that
were in some cases very devastating and
in every case FEMA came through this is
a very different kind of a work for FEMA
but they will come through as they
always do we have tremendous people
tremendous talent in FEMA we're sending
upon request the two hospital ships
they're being prepared right now they're
massive ships they're the big white
ships with the Red Cross on the sides
one is called the mercy and the other is
called the comfort and they
in tip-top shape they soon will be there
getting ready to come up to New York I
spoke with Governor Cuomo about it he's
excited about it and I also we haven't
made the final determination as to where
it's going to go on the west coast the
comfort is located now in San Diego and
it's going to be will be picking the
destination fairly shortly so those two
ships are being prepared to go and they
can be launched over the next week or so
depending on need earlier this week the
first clinical trial of the vaccine
candidate for the virus began in
Washington State as you probably know
the genetic sequence of the virus was
first published in January but thanks to
the unprecedented partnership between
the FDA NIH and the private sector we've
reached human trials for the vaccine
just eight weeks later that's a record
by many many months it used to take
years to do this and now we did it just
in a very short while that's the fastest
development in history of what we're
doing with regard to the vaccine making
very very big progress today I can
announce further steps to expand testing
capacity we're working with several
groups to determine if the self swab a
much easier process than the current
process that's not very nice to do I can
tell you because I did it but we have a
current process that's a little bit
difficult if you haven't done the the
groups are working on determining if a
self swab by an individual is as
effective as the other the others very
effective very accurate but we're going
to see if we can do a self swab which is
would be a lot more popular I can tell
you that so and that would be
administered also by a health official
but it would be a lot easier to do the
the fact is that the health
professionals would it would free it
would free up a lot let me just say the
self
WOB is what it is it's a self swab you
do it yourself the other has to be
issued by a health professional and it's
something that is quite difficult and we
think it's working out for the self swab
and if it would test positive the people
would go and they would do what they
have to do is but we think that's
probably working out I've asked the FDA
to cut through the red tape and reduce
regulatory barriers we are looking at
some very exciting things and I'm going
to be holding the second news conference
either today we're going to talk about
the FDA some things are happening that
are quite exciting and we're going to be
doing that either later today or
tomorrow fairly early tomorrow so we'll
see what happens but the FDA my
instructions is have been working very
very hard on a number of developments
and we'll be discussing them with you
later today or tomorrow and this
afternoon I'll be meeting with nurses on
the front lines of the battle against
the virus they're truly American heroes
they want to get it done they're
incredible people so we're gonna be
meeting with nurses and actually look
forward to that very brave they're
taking a lot of risk and they they have
done an incredible job and they never
complain today I'm also announcing that
the Department of Housing and Urban
development's is providing immediate
relief to renters and homeowners by
suspending all foreclosures and
evictions until the end of April so
we're working very closely with dr. ben
Carson and everybody from HUD every
generation of Americans has been called
to make shared sacrifices for the good
of the nation in World War two young
people in their teenage years
volunteered to fight they wanted to
fight so badly because they loved our
country
workers refused to go home and slept in
factory floors to keep assembly lines
running and you know the numbers of
ships that they built through in World
War two to this day has never nothing
like that has ever been equal they were
doing ships on a literally on a daily
basis nobody's ever seen anything like
and to this day nobody's seen anything
like that what they were able to do
during World War two and now it's our
time we must sacrifice together because
we are all in this together and we'll
come through together it's the invisible
enemy that's always the toughest enemy
the invisible enemy but we're going to
defeat the invisible enemy I think we're
going to do it even faster than we
thought and it will be a complete
victory it'll be a total victory so
we'll have a second conference again
having to do with the FDA and this I
think it's going to be potentially a
very exciting news conference and we
will do it as quickly as we can so
whether it's today or tomorrow and I'll
with that ask Mike Pence to say a few
words and thank you very much thank you
mr. president the White House
coronavirus task force met this morning
and now that we have cases in all 50
states we're continuing to move out on
the president's call to bring the full
resources of the federal government a
full partnership with every state and
territory the full power of the American
economy to support businesses and
families as the president says to us and
every day we'll do whatever it takes
we're all in this together
yesterday the president met with the
tourism industry executives and also had
an engaging discussion with all the top
companies in our industrial and medical
supply chain the president as you all
are were also announced today that by
mutual consent the northern border to
Canada will be closed to non-essential
travel this does not include essential
travel or the transit of goods but it
was through a mutual discussion that
took place this morning between the
president and Prime Minister Trudeau and
the Department of Homeland Security will
be effectuating at that decision
president spoke with some of the
nation's top business leaders today
again to speak about the supply chain in
the country and for our part we're going
to be conducting a conference call later
today with state and local health
officials to renew
our ongoing commitment of cooperation
and collaboration as the president said
last week in signing the Stafford Act
he stood up the National Response
Coordination Center and today at the
president's direction
FEMA has gone to level one FEMA's
mission is to support disasters that are
locally executed state managed and
federally supported and tomorrow the
president will be hosting all the
nation's governor's from a video
conference at FEMA to ensure that they
have full connection to all of the
activated regions for FEMA going forward
and with regard to testing I'm pleased
to report that we're increasing the
number of tests being performed by the
thousands every day thanks to the
public-private partnership that
President Trump forged with commercial
laboratories around the country our
health experts tell us to remind every
American it's important to remember
people without symptoms should not get
tested we want to make sure that the
supply of testing is there for those
that need it most or are symptomatic or
in the vulnerable population dr. deborah
birx in a moment we'll address the
progress that we're making on testing
the infection rate our recommendations
to every America as well as some
important new findings about the impact
on youth that we're gaining from data
that's coming in from Europe that'll be
important to every every American on the
subject of supplies and the president
has our task force extremely focused as
the president mentioned yesterday
mentioned that he's invoking the defense
production act today secretary Esper in
a few moments will describe the ongoing
efforts that the Department of Defense
is taking to make medical resources
available secretary Robert Wilkie will
announce decisions the VA has made to
expand hospital capacity within their
system also with regard to medical
personnel at the president's Direction
HHS is issuing a regulation today that
will allow all doctors and medical
professionals to practice across state
lines to meet the needs of hospitals
that may
rise in adjoining areas in addition to
that we are again today asking every
American and our medical community
leaders and hospitals to partner with us
in delaying elective procedures across
the country in our health care system to
ensure that medical supplies and medical
capacity go where they're needed most
Seema Verma will describe guidance that
CMS will be issuing on that front
and finally just I want to remind every
American of the president's 15 day
guidance to slow the spread we are
grateful for members of the media and
the general public that are adhering to
these sharing them with neighbors and
friends all of our experts continue to
believe that if every American will do
their part and embrace and put into
practice these principles that we can
significantly limit the reach of the
corona virus in the weeks and months
ahead thank you Miss thank you very much
thank you
Thank You mr. president mr. vice
president so you know we continue to
look at data every single day there are
concerning reports coming out of France
and Italy about some young people
getting seriously ill and very seriously
ill in the ICUs
we think part of this may be that people
heeded the early data coming out of
China and coming out of South Korea
without the elderly or those with
pre-existing medical conditions were at
particular risk it may have been that
the millennial generation our largest
generation our future generation that
will carry us through for the next
multiple decades there may be
disproportional a number of infections
among that group and so even if it's a
rare occurrence it may be seen more
frequently in that group and be evident
now so we're looking at that information
very carefully we have not seen any
significant mortality in the children
but we are concerned about the early
reports coming out of Italy and France
so again I'm going to call on that
generation
that's part of that group that brought
us innovation particularly throughout
all of their ability to look around
corners and skip through games and I
always went level by level I didn't
realize that you could go from level
three to level seven that's what they've
taught us they look for things that we
don't see we need them to be healthy so
again not all in calling on you to
adhere what's in the agai dense but to
really ensure that each and every one of
you are protecting each other and so we
cannot have these large gatherings that
continue to occur throughout the country
for people who are off work to then be
socializing in large groups and
spreading the virus you have the
potential then to spread it to someone
who does have a condition that none of
us knew about and caused them to have a
disastrous outcome finally on the
testing piece and what we're learning I
know you know last week and bringing the
private sector I think what has been
exciting to me over the last two and a
half weeks is to see this administration
harness the full capacity of the private
sector understanding that a lot of our
solutions that we need to confront this
virus lot rely on the private sector
bringing the private sector commercial
labs was critical into this process we
are now beginning to see that they have
spread out in a prioritized way because
we asked them to prioritize the regions
that were mostly affected and so you
still may have difficulty getting tests
in areas that do not have significant
cases we've had them prioritized the
regions where we need diagnosis and
their diagnostic percent remember I told
you South Korea was under 4% so 96% of
people were negative the last report
we've seen from the laboratories have
about a 7 plus percent positivity rate
still 93 plus percent or 92 percent are
negative but I think that's encouraging
to me personally that we're prioritizing
appropriately to those areas that have
the greatest need today and yesterday
thermo Fisher
pushed out most of their laboratory
testing capacity and that will
dramatically increase the at platform
and the ability to run a dish
tests in addition to rosh so i
appreciate everybody's attention to
these numbers i'm i'm excited that we
prioritized where the need was the
greatest but again please follow the
guidance and please make sure in every
report that you're putting out that
you're talking about the presidential
guidance to actually stop the spread of
this virus thank you so good afternoon
everyone and i want to provide an update
on DoD's coronavirus up efforts as we
continue to focus on our three
priorities that's first of all
protecting our personnel and their
families second safeguarding our
national security mission capabilities
and third of course supporting the
administration's whole-of-government
approach first of all though I do want
to assure the American people that the
United States military remains ready and
capable of defending the country and our
interests abroad now with that the
department is leaning forward in our
response to kovat 19 we have issued
international and domestic travel
restrictions to all DoD personnel and
families that should dramatically reduce
potential exposure to the virus those
have been in place for some time now as
I announced yesterday the Department of
fence will make available up to five
million n95 respirator masks and other
personal protective equipment from our
own strategic reserves to the Department
of Health and Human Services for
distribution the first 1 million masks
will be available immediately we're also
prepared to distribute to HHS up to
2,000 operational deployables
ventilators for use as needed yesterday
I was at Fort Detrick Maryland which is
probably the military's a premier
Research Institute where I got updated
on the incredible work our people are
doing as part of the interagency team to
work on vaccines and therapeutics they
are making great progress there we also
have announced that we've certified our
16th lab or will soon certified our 16th
lab to help with processing tests from
across the country additionally I have
directed as the president mentioned that
the hospital ships mercy and comfort be
prepared to deploy to increase the
nation's medical capacity and we have
also alerted a variety of filled and
expeditionary hospitals to be prepared
to deploy
as well as needed based on direction
from the commander-in-chief today a
leadership from the Army Corps of
Engineers is in New York meeting with
Governor Cuomo and his team I spoke with
Governor Cuomo yesterday and other
governors I will be speaking to more in
the coming days to make sure that they
know what DoD can provide through our
system to and to address their needs in
my conversations with governor's and
members of Congress about DoD's
resources I've made it clear that we
will continue to support the
administration's comprehensive efforts
and the country every step of the way
while ensuring our nation's security
remains the top priority I want to
conclude by thanking again all of our
service members and their families who
have been affected by this outbreak they
are all great heroes we are continue to
support them throughout this we are all
in this together thank you all very much
thank you very much so yesterday the
president made a very important
announcement about telehealth and this
is allowing our 62 million seniors to be
able to get some medical services from
the safety of their home reducing their
risk and without any co-pays but we're
also making sure that the health care
system is prepared and that those on the
front lines have the support that they
need the reality is the stakes are high
and we need to preserve personal
protective equipment for those that are
on the frontlines of this fight and to
that end we have put out guidelines over
the last two weeks to expand the types
of mass that can be used in routine care
and saving those and 95s for the most
risky situations conserving personal
protective equipment is also essential
to combat the virus
so today CMS will announce detailed
recommendations to further promote this
needed conservation specifically by
limiting non-essential elective medical
and surgical procedures including dental
procedures we believe that these
recommendations will help surgeons
patients and hospitals prioritize what
is essential while leaving the ultimate
decision in the hands of state and local
health officials and those clinicians
who have direct responsibility to their
patients and we urge providers and
clinicians and patients to seriously
consider these recommendations they will
not only preserve equipment but it also
allows doctors and nurses to help those
that are on the front lines and it will
protect patients from unnecessary
exposure to the virus we fully
appreciate that this is going to have a
major impact on the healthcare system
but the shared sacrifice is essential to
help those that are on the frontlines
and I want to thank the medical
societies such as the American College
of Surgeons and the American Dental
Association that took a proactive
approach and already posted these
recommendations and we've also talked to
the American Medical Association and
they have fully indicated their support
for this recommendation we now invite
the entire healthcare community to join
us in this effort thank you Thank You
mr. president my instructions from the
president were very clear I was to do
everything imaginable as aggressively as
possible to protect the nine and a half
million veterans who are part of the
Department of Veterans Affairs
last month we established 19 emergency
operations centers across the country we
began to limit the number of visitors
who entered our facilities we began I
think the first we were the first system
to begin triaging across the country and
our 170 hospitals the entrance of anyone
into our facility without being
questioned or tested we expanded those
restrictions to those in our 135
community living centers which which
have about 7800 veterans who are in
acute and acute conditions to make sure
that they were protected we also took
the next step and made sure that we
limited the dental surgeries that we
were provided we've cut back by
one-third the number of routine
appointments we have had and we have
canceled elective surgeries these were
all part the president's directive to be
as aggressive in a public health sense
as we could be and I think we have set
the pace for the entire country I will
say we've often said that we work the
most noble mission in the fed
government our veterans have been in the
toughest spots in the world they have
been put in conditional conditions that
are unimaginable to most Americans and
they have responded they've responded
clearly they have responded with passion
and also the 400,000 members of our
department who are out there on the
front lines the last thing I will say is
that you have heard a lot about the
fourth mission that VA has our first
three missions are health care benefits
and memorial affairs our fourth mission
is to support the federal government in
times of natural disasters and pandemics
we are the the buttress force in case
that FEMA or HHS calls upon us to deploy
medical professionals across the country
to meet crises but we plan for that
every day we are gaming out emergency
preparedness scenarios and we stand
ready when the president needs us to
expand our mission thank you your
Treasury secretary was on Capitol Hill
talking about the potential for what
could come and he said that unemployment
could skyrocket to 20 percent are we
looking that that could rival the Great
Depression are we looking at potentially
no I don't agree that's a absolute total
worst-case scenario but no we don't look
at that at all we're nowhere near it
okay why do you keep calling this the
Chinese virus there are reports of
dozens of incidents of bias against
Chinese Americans in this
country your own a secretary a czar and
says he does not use this term because
ethnicity does not cause the virus why
do you keep using this letter comes
injury exist it's not racist at all no
let it okay it comes from China
that's why comes from China I want to be
accurate please John I have a great high
up great love for all of the people from
our country but as you know China tried
to say at one point maybe this stuff now
that it was caused by American soldiers
that can't happen it's not gonna happen
not as long as I'm president it comes
from China jellyfish
two questions like that mr. president
first of all as a defense procurement
act you're invoking it today senator she
have said on the floor a short time ago
that it urgently needs to be put into
action to produce medical supplies
particularly ventilators do you have
seen targets that you would like to see
immediately spooled up under you do have
we have tremendous numbers of
ventilators but there's never been an
instance like this where no matter what
you have it's not enough that would be
the case and we will be it's it's being
signed it's essentially drawn and we're
going to sign it in just a little while
if we need to use it we'll be using it
at full speed ahead it's urgent Lee
needed to be do you have some time
wasn't to know whether or not urgent but
we will yeah we do have targets we have
targets for certain pieces of equipment
we have targets for masks you know the
masks and numbers of masks are
incredible we've ordered millions of
them but we need millions more this a
thing like this has never been requested
and it's never we never had even think
in terms of these numbers but we need
millions of masks and all of that will
be order we need respirators we need
ventilators is a big thing because it's
a complex piece of equipment so we have
a lot of ventilators but we're going to
be ordering more a second question what
size will the checks be that will be
sent out to be determined we're working
with the Senate right now we're working
with everybody on Capitol Hill there's
been tremendous there really has been I
mean with with some exceptions obviously
because it's always the way it is but
there has been they've been getting
along
Republicans and Democrats it's a nice
thing very bipartisan so $4,000 what
we're gonna see I don't want to get into
that right now John we we are looking at
different numbers we're looking at
timing that would be different splitting
the time splitting the payments we're
looking at a lot of different things
hasn't been determined yet but it will
shortly be determined and people want to
go big as opposed everybody seems to
want to go big and they want to get to
the recovery the big day is the big
thing we can do is get rid of this
horrible I call it the unseen the unseen
enemy you call it you is it that was in
different terms for it but what it snuck
up on us and it's it did 128 countries I
think it's in something like that very
close to that think of that so it
spreads violently it's a very contagious
very very contagious virus American to
be on a wartime footing in terms of
fighting this virus I do I actually do
I'm looking at it that way because you
know if it got out of control the big
thing we did was a very early stoppage
of people coming in who could be very
very heavily infected and that was a it
was a very good move and it was very
early very very early when most people
including a lot of professionals they
didn't want us to do it that really
saved a lot of lives and yeah I look at
it I view it as a in a sense of wartime
president I mean that's what we're
fighting I mean it's a it's a it's a
very tough situation you you have to do
things you have to you have to close
parts of an economy that six weeks ago
were were the best they've ever been we
had the best economy we've ever had and
then one day you have to close it down
in order to defeat this enemy and but
we're doing it and we're doing it well
and I tell you the American people have
been incredible for the most part
they've been really incredible yeah
please Skateland
secretary work is although I'll start
with you you just said there are a
tremendous number of ventilators that we
have but for weeks
hospitals have been warning about a
critical shortages they say we are not
prepared for so why did it take so long
you know hospitals are supposed to have
ventilators too and when we have
thousands of ventilators it sounds like
a lot but this is a very unforeseen
thing nobody ever thought of these
numbers nobody ever saw numbers like
this even with regard to testing
normally we wouldn't be doing testing
and they decided to do it very very hard
to ramp up now we're getting highly
sophisticated tests and it's going very
well but nobody's ever heard of testing
in the kind of quantities that you're
talking about well it depends it depends
on how it goes worst case absolutely the
best case not not at all so we're gonna
have to see where it goes but we are
ordering thousands and thousands of
ventilators and they're complex you know
these are complex machines and but we're
ordering them does anybody have a
microwave you do how many do we have you
know the number we have a specific
number of ventilators in the stockpile
it's in excess of of 10,000 and you just
heard the announcement from the
Department of Defense they'll be adding
several more thousand to that but
president even this morning and
yesterday afternoon speaking with the
the largest companies in the supply
chain in this country we're hearing a
tremendous spirit among industry leaders
who are ready to step in and add to that
volume the stockpiles don't count all of
the ventilators that exist today in the
marketplace and in health care
facilities around the country but the
president's given us a a director to
make sure that our stockpile but just as
importantly working with industry
leaders that were securing the increase
in ventilators the increase in masks
gloves IRA protective care garments that
are all necessary to lean forward and
we're confident we'll be able to
accomplish that with the incredible
cooperation of the supply chain that
exists in America today
[Music]
we can give you the exact name but we'll
get the key but we're ordering we're
ordering a lot more one second one
second k then we'll do it in a second
mr. president thank you first one on the
Canadian border what was the tipping
point Friday we talked about it that
Monday you said no one knew we're not
considering no I said not yet I spoke
with the Prime Minister Trudeau a very
good relationship obviously between us
and our two countries and no tipping
point it's just that we want to we want
to isolate from the standpoint we don't
want people coming into contact because
that's the way we're gonna win this war
that is so important and we both thought
it was something now it's not affecting
trade
it's non-essential it's non-essential
crossings
it won't affect trade it at all and it
was just something we thought would be
good for both countries yes please how
can you be sure the trade and everything
that's being shipped from one side
they're doing it in a very careful
manner you can only be vigilant and very
professional but we're not it's not
pertaining at this moment to trade
between the two countries
yeah please the trillion-dollar economic
stimulus package something like 50
billion for the airlines 150 billion
dollars in loan guarantees in critical
sectors of the economy a 250 billion
dollar payment on April 6th directly to
individuals another 250 billion dollar
payment on May 18th again
directly to individuals and as well
three hundred billion dollars for small
business loan guarantees is that in the
general sense what could be that could
be and we're also playing with a lot of
numbers a lot of very big numbers and a
lot of very small numbers frankly we
want to take care of we have to help
everybody it was nobody's fault
this happened I mean some people could
say it was somebody's fault actually but
it was nobody's fault and certainly none
of these companies that all of a sudden
had no passengers and planes and had no
passengers on cruise ships and all of
the things that have happened but I will
say that they can't be blamed for this
and we want to keep those companies
because it's going to be a comeback very
very quickly as soon as this is solved
and it will be solved
we will win and there will be a comeback
and it'll take place very quickly
there's give or take 330 million
Americans or so you just do the math on
that that's about 750 dollars a person a
family of four that would be about three
thousand dollars on average again rough
rough math which is that way this is how
I don't want to say that because it's a
moving these are all every number that
you mentioned
yes we've talked about those numbers
we're also moving those numbers in both
directions so we'll let you know it'll
be it's moving along fast again there's
a great bipartisan effort going on that
that I haven't really seen before to
this extent down the line and they're
looking at it very seriously and I think
would be a great thing because the
others to use a nice word it's very
inconvenient it's very tough racer you
tweeted this morning about your approval
rating amongst Republicans you have said
that you give yourself a ten in terms of
handling this crisis how do you reassure
Americans at home who don't trust you to
handle a crisis of this magnitude well I
think we're doing a really good job we
started off with a termination of the
border the people coming in from China
where this all started
that meant I took it very seriously and
when I use the word calm calm doesn't
mean that I'm not taking it seriously
calm means and we should be calm we
should be extremely calm but yeah ninety
five percent within the Republican Party
and over fifty percent and I also have
we have very great approval numbers I
mean people like the job that we're
doing and when you can't compare this to
other epidemics or if you want to use a
different term you can but within this
country and you look at what's happened
over the years this is being handled
very very professionally they're the
greatest professionals in the world
we're doing a good job
nobody has ever been swamped like this
and nothing's been so contagious the
level of contagion has been
incredible actually nobody's seen
anything quite like this Peter go ahead
for a second if federal officials have
shipped millions of tests as you and
your colleagues have said why is the
federal government sets of only 15 59
thousand tests been processed to this
point we just heard from the Atlanta
public health director saying that they
have fewer than 50 test kits for more
than 900,000 citizens or less so that's
a very critical question and thank you
for asking it so the test kits that we
put out last week through the approval
the rapid movement of that meeting that
President Trump called less than two
weeks ago that has resulted in bringing
our private sector to the table because
the tests in the platform that was out
there could only run between four and
twelve tests per platform per day we've
now moved into platforms that can run
basically tens of thousands of tests per
day so yeah the reason I'm grateful for
your question because it allows me to
point out that a course then there was
backlog there were individuals who had
been tested who hadn't had their
specimen run because of the slow
throughput it's now in a high-speed
platform so we will see the number of
people diagnosed dramatically increase
over the next four to five days I know
some of you will use that to raise an
alarm that we are worse than Italy
because of our slope of our curve to
every American out there it will be five
to six days worth of tests being run in
24 to 48 hours
so our curves will not be stable until
sometime next week the reason I talked
about thermo Fisher yesterday is because
their platform is in two thousand
laboratories they're the ones that are
putting out the million tests this week
that will solve the issue that atlanta
and others have brought up I wanted to
be clear we prioritize the areas we do
county-by-county analyses base
those analyses on what counties had more
than 50 cases we prioritize the test
kits we put out the 400,000 and that's
why we're seeing a 7 percent plus
positivity rate we'll be able to expand
that platform and reprioritize based on
the accessibility of the other kits
perhaps I could follow up our non
symptomatic professional athletes
getting tests while others are waiting
in line and can't get them to the
well-connected go to the front of the
line well that you'd have to ask them
that question I mean the I've read no I
wouldn't say so but perhaps that's been
the story of life that does happen on
occasion and I've noticed where some
people have been tested fairly quickly
look we inherited a very excuse me
father
excuse me we inherited a very obsolete
system this was a system that was
out-of-date obsolete or it was a system
that was never meant to take care of the
kind of quantity the number of people
that we're talking about millions and
millions of people if you go back in
years past like even recently with the
flu
nobody had tests before they didn't test
the entire nation to see whether or not
they had flu they got the flu they got
better hopefully they got better that
was it now all of a sudden they do this
very complex testing what we've done is
we broken it down we've broken up the
system but it was obsolete and or you
could say it was also a system that just
wasn't meant to handle the kind of
volley volume that you're talking about
we've rebuilt it into a system that for
the future will be a very good system if
you want to go this route but this was
never done before and I would imagine it
will be done in the future but we built
it into a very good system by using
private companies the great private
companies and I have to say Rocha has
been doing a very good job they are
doing a lot of work a very good job but
this was an obsolete system this was not
a system that was meant to do anything
like this or even near this John
a couple of days a major trade Coalition
is calling on you to suspend tariffs
with other countries as part of the
response to the coronavirus heads that
grew those countries do know it's about
check it's an american free trade I know
I'm sure a free trade look china is
paying us billions and billions of
dollars in tariffs and there's no reason
to do that they haven't even spoken to
me about that China hasn't asked me to
do that but we're getting billions of
dollars here from tariffs from China and
I can't imagine Americans asking for
that but it could be the China will ask
for a suspension or something let's see
what happens China's having a very rough
time they have their worst year in 76
years as I understand it they have at a
very very tough time and then on top of
it this happened with the virus but no
we're taking in billions of dollars a
year in tariffs and this was caused by
something totally unrelated to tariffs
seekers and people who crossed the
southern border illegally
are you planning to invoke 42 USC 265
which would allow you to prohibit entry
of certain people inches yes probably
today well I think essential is medical
we have military working together we
have industry working together and again
it's not affecting trade so things like
that but just leisurely let's go to a
restaurant that have dinner which a lot
of people do they come both ways they go
in both directions that kind of thing we
we have ended on a temporary basis yeah
please go ahead not close it no we're
not gonna close it but we are invoking a
certain provision that will allow us
great latitude as to what we do
so to clarify something because just a
week ago
um you all were standing here telling us
that unless you had sustained contact
with somebody who is symptomatic for
COBIT 19 you really didn't need to work
for the president the vice president
that if they shook hands with somebody
who had this if they took a photograph
with with somebody who had this he
didn't really need to worry and yet
several days later we're in a situation
where people are being told don't leave
your house is there a curfew saying you
cannot walk alone at night after a
certain time can you walk us through
what seemed like a very dramatic swaying
a very dramatic disconnect from what we
were hearing before to what we're going
out so two things we look at data all
the time and I know you're looking at
the China and South Korea data and when
you look at China and South Korea data
and you look what China and South Korea
did you can see that their curves are
not only blunted outside of Wuhan so the
Chinese areas outside of Wuhan blunted
curve and South Korea blunted curve if
you look at their curve today they're
already on the far end of their epidemic
curve of course none of those countries
are fully back to work and so that's
what we worry about too secondly there
was a series of scientific articles
published and I know you've seen them
too about surface contamination I think
none of us really understood the level
of surface piece so we're still working
out how much is it by human human
transmission and how much is if I
surface this is why those fundamental
guidelines were put out that says don't
expose yourself to surfaces outside the
home basically what those guidelines are
is don't expose yourself to excess
number of persons who could be
asymptomatic and infected and then the
person-to-person contact and don't
expose yourself to surfaces that could
have had the virus on it for which on
hard surfaces I know we had the
cardboard issue about shipping hard
surfaces not shown in fabric as much or
in cardboard but hard surface
transmission these are issues that we
haven't had to deal with before with a
level of respiratory infections and
that's why we have this concern and
that's why the president put out the
guidelines and so it's to cover both of
those pieces that's
all new science all new models I think
many of you have the Imperial study
available and looked at the impact of
those that's the first time those have
been modeled as a comprehensive approach
to mitigating an epidemic scientists
patients at risk now I haven't seen the
article we will we are making a lot of
progress therapeutically I will say that
and but I have not seen that article now
we've shut down non-essential travel to
Canada
are you considering shutting down all
travel to brunt the spread of the virus
and we've heard from industries like the
airline's who are seeking relief
what other industries or what how
exactly is your administration I'm going
to determine which industries and
businesses certain industries the people
know and the airlines would be number
one if you look at what's going on they
go from having the best year they've
ever had to having no passengers because
of what we've had to do in order to win
this war it's a war and so you know
basically you know what many of the
industries are what we want to do is we
want to make sure they all stay together
so that after the war is won we can
immediately go right back up to where we
were and even beyond I think we're going
to go beyond where we were a lot of
people are saying that by the way we're
poised to do that but we have to win the
workforce yeah please go ahead proposed
150 billion dollars today for those
industries but their proposal doesn't
detail which industries we get that
money and how much so aside from the
airlines which you just mentioned what
about the cruise industry the hotels how
much of that money do you see them we're
talking about all of it haven't detailed
it yet we have detailed of two senators
and two members of the House we have
been talking about it and we're coming
up with numbers haven't gotten there yet
but certainly hotel industry the cruise
ship industry the airlines those are all
prime candidates Epson reporter sir when
you say to your Tory
then we're the reporter when you say
temporary which is what you said in your
tweet did that mean 30 days I would say
30 days and hopefully at the end of 30
days we'll be in great shape Millennials
and others perhaps not taking some of
these warnings as seriously as you would
like some of those people also seem to
be your supporters and conservatives who
may be quoting some of what you said at
the beginning of this comparing it to
the flu what is your message to them to
really follow what you've been saying so
far and are you concerned that they're
still listening maybe to some of your
earlier comments rather than your more
recent ones well I think my earlier
comments to become I mean I do want
people to become because we're gonna win
this and we're gonna win it it's just a
question of time and I wanted to go
quickly so based on the fact that I
wanted to go quickly I hope they just
listen to what we've been saying over
the last period of time we don't want
them gathering and I see they do gather
including on beaches and including in
restaurants young people they don't
realize they're feeling invincible I
don't know if you felt invincible when
you were very young but they were
feeling totally invincible or are
feeling that way but they don't realize
that they can be carrying lots of bad
things home to grandmother and
grandfather and even their parents so we
want them to heed the advice we made the
advice said I think it's getting through
I do believe it's getting through Jim
sorry because it went I think there were
a lot of them watching a lot of these
people at home these young people well I
think the advice heed the advice I just
said yeah thank you thank you Peter
say thank you miss Martha I'm talking
about China you've been very clear about
who you think it's to blame or where the
origin to blame for this viruses nothing
no no I don't think I know who where it
came from I don't know if you'd say
China is to blame certainly we didn't
get an early run on it it would have
been helpful if we knew about it earlier
but it comes from China and it's not a
question about that nobody's questioning
that saying that they should be punished
in so many words for inflicting this on
the American people do you feel that way
about I have a lot of respect for Tom
cotton and I know exactly what he's been
saying and there were those people that
say that so we'll see what happens thank
you a long time it's your turn
thanks sir we've seen the Chinese
government kick out reporters from The
Wall Street Journal the New York Times
The Washington Post what is your message
to the Chinese when it comes to
transparency and a moment we still have
reporters asking you questions here at
the White House yeah I'm not happy to
see it I don't you know I have my own
disputes with all three of those media
groups I think you know that very well
but I don't like seeing that at all I'm
not happy about that at all yes you
agree with it do you believe that China
is inflicting this upon our country no I
don't believe they're inflicting I think
they could have given us a lot earlier
notice absolutely
yeah mr. president your your credibility
ratings are very low there's a recent
NPR all who you were asking that
question I'm asking because I see that
they're very high you know if you look
I'm ninety five percent of the
Republican Party we just had a poll that
was done by a very reputable group we're
beating sleepy Joe Biden by a lot in
Florida in the state of Florida and in
other states you know so I don't really
know who you're talking about hi
Jennifer go ahead explain to them what's
coming what was their reaction and they
explained to me where they're coming
from I mean they went from as I said
full planes packed the best year they've
ever had by far to bomb one day empty
because of what we have to do to get rid
of to win this war or we would have a
level of death like people haven't seen
before so they've been fantastic I mean
they've been great but you know they
went from being extremely happy to being
people that are running companies that
are gonna need some help and we'll help
them Jennifer would you be willing to
give us an update on how that's going
we've been getting some reports that
counties have been having difficulty
getting what's going I mean there's a
lot of influx to those lungs as you
could imagine a lot of people are
looking at it but we're gonna be
increasing funding a lot and they're
very well prepared to do what they have
to do and the SBA is doing a fantastic
job she is doing a really good job the
administrator just if I could dr.
burgher
Frank researchers have had some luck
with hydroxychloroquine in shortening
the duration of disease is that
something that might be in the arsenal
of therapeutics here in the United
States
I think we were exploring every one of
those issues on the president asked for
a critical briefing on that today he
opened with that it is more than that
single drug there are other drugs that
individuals are looking at just to go
back to what we talked about many times
there is things that look really good in
cell culture against the virus that may
look good in small animals and then
don't have an impact in humans and so
those are the pieces that we're looking
at very carefully of course there's
always antidotal reports and we're
trying to figure out how many Ana Dodos
reports equal real scientific
breakthroughs are you confident of the
seasonality of koalas all we can do is
look at the past to inform the future we
know what's ours looked like we also
know and I just want to put this out I
know you can get it online look at the
curve in China and look at the curve in
South Korea those curves were
accomplished and still the winter season
and so we're trying to understand what
those relationships are we're very
interested in the curves in Italy
because of their different approach and
we're following every single country's
curves and so all we can do is look at
prior coronavirus and prior respiratory
infection RNA viruses these are RNA
viruses when you look at flu in the
northern hemisphere when you look at
para influenza and some of the other
cold viruses and if you look at SARS
that's the way the peak normally occurs
but that is a November to April we all
started later and so you're asking me to
predict based on a later start and
that's what we're trying to really look
at China and South Korea to really
inform them
the question for Secretariat will keep
you don't live or you can interview like
how many veterans of those that you need
to be tested have been tested those that
have needed to be tested we believe
we've caught most of them right now we
have 44 veterans who have tested
positive sadly one has passed in
Portland we are working with state labs
and private companies to make sure that
testing is available because the
president had us out aggressively early
we have we have been in a better place
than most healthcare systems in the
country I cannot predict this dr. Burke
set when the next surge will be if it
will be but one of the things that we do
at VA is that we prepare for national
emergencies be the national disasters or
epidemics we started preparing for this
we started stockpiling equipment our
equipment is stable and I think that's
in large part because the instructions
the president I can't give you the yeah
we've tested several hundred yes we've
tested several I don't know exactly I do
know that 44 veterans have the virus
most of those are quarantined at home
[Music]
I'm trying to understand what we it's
about the mortality rate yesterday we
underlined the fact that we had reached
a hundred deaths and this morning we
wake up and were 110 within 12 hours we
climb by 10 percent is it something we
have to expect from now on a 10 percent
increase every 12 hours so very early on
in each one of these cases if you look
at all of the countries to date the
mortality is higher at the beginning
because you're diagnosing the sickest
the ones who came in quite ill and I
just want to remind the American public
still the majority the risk for serious
illness and the majority of Americans
are low but that doesn't mean that you
can't transmit it to one of those higher
risk groups and that's why we're asking
for all Americans to take responsibility
you're seeing mortality or deaths today
from infections that occurred two to
three weeks ago in general the other
thing that you're seeing is the dramatic
and very difficult impact of this virus
in nursing homes and that's why very
early on the president and vice
president had us come out and CMS put
those very strict rules in place and
everybody thought we were being too
strict and keeping loved ones away from
their family at nursing homes if we're
going to solve this with a lower death
rate we have to protect the elderly
because of their percent is much higher
in mortality than any other age group
that the federal government has a plan
that shows this coronavirus outbreak
might last as much as long as 18 months
are you seeing those numbers there are
some at least one White House official
who use the term become flu referring to
the fact that this virus started in
China is that acceptable is it wrong are
you worried that that having describers
being talked about as as a Chinese virus
but the person's name but would you can
use the facts say the time again the a
person at the White House used it to
crystallin flu my question is that's
wrong come flu and do you think using
the term Chinese virus that puts
asian-americans no no I think they
probably would agree with it 100 percent
it comes from China there's nothing not
to agree okay how about the last
question
switching gears to a larger question
here we've seen that before the pandemic
there were a lot of Americans that were
already alienated we saw a deaths of
despair increasing through suicide and
other things now is these individuals a
lot of times in rural parts of the
country are self isolating what is your
message to those individuals and what do
you hope that individuals communities
and churches will be able to return my
messages to all Americans but to those
Americans who are going through a lot we
love them we're with them and we will
not let them down thank you all very
much